docs: add an MDC migration guide (#25543)
angular/components: guides/v15-mdc-migration.md

component/directive selectors for the new components have been kept as close as possible to the old
implementation. This makes it straightforward to migrate your app and get it running with the new
components.

Due to the new DOM and CSS, you will likely find that some styles in your app need to be adjusted,
particularly if your CSS is overriding styles on internal elements on any of the migrated
components.

There are a few components with larger changes to their APIs that were necessary in order to
integrate with MDC. These components include:
* form-field
* chips
* slider
* list

See below for a [detailed list of changes](#Detailed List of Changes) to be aware of for these and
other components.

The old implementation of each new component is now deprecated, but still available under a "legacy"
package. e.g. The old `mat-button` implementation can be used by importing the legacy button module.

```ts
import {MatLegacyButtonModule} from '@angular/material/legacy-button';
```

## How to Migrate

Migrating an existing app to use MDC based components is a tool-assisted migration. The Angular

> Material team has built schematics to handle as much of the work as possible. However, some manual

Reviewer: Maybe there should be a link to what a schematic is here

effort will be needed.

You can reduce the amount of manual effort needed by ensuring that your app follows good practices
before migrating.
* Avoid overriding styles on internal Angular Material elements in your CSS as much as possible. If
  you find yourself frequently overriding styles on internal elements, consider using a component
  that is designed for more style customization, such as the ones available in the
  [Angular CDK](/cdk).
* Use [component harnesses](./using-component-harnesses) to interact with Angular Material

>   components in tests rather than probing internal elements, properties, or methods of the

Reviewer: I would use the word targeting instead of probing here to make it more clear

Author: "targeting" makes sense for CSS selectors, I'm not sure if it makes sense for properties and methods, but I'm open to different word choice, I'm not a languager

Author: changed to "inspecting" which is hopefully clearer

  component. Using component harnesses makes your tests easier to understand and more robust to
  changes in Angular Material

### 1. Update to Angular Material v15

Angular Material now includes a schematic to help migrate pre-existing apps to use the new
MDC-based components. To get started, upgrade your app to Angular Material 15.

```shell
ng update @angular/components^15
```

> As part of this update, a schematic will run to automatically move your app to use the "legacy"

Reviewer: Hmmm. Its a little jarring to see the word legacy in the section about upgrading to angular material v15. I think it might be helpful to explain that the existing components are now moved to legacy to understand why this move is happening.

Author: That is explained in the "what has changed" section above, not that people will necessarily read it before jumping the the heading marked "1."

packages containing the old component implementations. This provides a quick path to getting your
app running on v15 with minimal manual changes.

### 2. Run the MDC Migration Script

After upgrading to v15, you can run the MDC Migration Script to switch from the legacy component
implementations to the new MDC-based ones.

```shell

> ng generate # TODO(wagnermaciel): Insert command here.

Reviewer 2: Amy is currently working on getting ng generate working locally so I'll have a more concrete answer for these three q's you once she gets that set up

Reviewer 2: Ah, nvm. Amy already answered 👍🏽

```

This command will update your app's TypeScript, CSS, and templates to the new implementations,
updating as much as it can automatically.

#### Running a Partial Migration

Depending on the size and complexity of your app, you may want to migrate a single component (or
small group of components) at a time, rather than all at once. 

> TODO(wagnermaciel): Add details on this: script params, which components need to move together

Reviewer: The only group of components that need to be migrated together are autocomplete, form-field, input, and select (https://github.com/angular/components/blob/main/src/material/schematics/ng-generate/mdc-migration/index.ts#L21)

Author: I see, and what happens if I do `ng generate @angular/material:mdc-migration --component input`? Does that migrate the whole group or do they have to do `ng generate @angular/material:mdc-migration --component input,form-field,autocomplete,select`?

> TODO(wagnermaciel): Add details on this: script params, which components need to move together

Reviewer: The 3 params are the tsconfig, the directory that will be migrated, and the list of the components (https://github.com/angular/components/blob/main/src/material/schematics/ng-generate/mdc-migration/schema.json).

Right now the integration test's command looks like this: 
ng generate @angular/material:mdc-migration --components all --tsconfig tsconfig.app.json (https://github.com/angular/components/blob/main/integration/mdc-migration/migration-test.bzl#L34)

Reviewer 2: It'd be good to add an example of migrating specific components as well

Author: What happens if I don't specify any of the params and just do `ng generate @angular/material:mdc-migration` do they default to something? does it prompt me?

Reviewer 2: I'm 99% sure it does prompt you but @amysorto  would know for certain

You may also want to migrate your app one module at a time instead of all together. It is possible
to use both the old implementation and new implementation in the same app, as long as they aren't
used in the same module. TODO(wagnermaciel): Add detail on this: script params.

### 3. Check for TODOs left by the migration script.

In situations where the script is not able to automatically update your code, it will attempt to add
comments for a human to follow up. These TODO comments follow a common format, so they can be easily
identified.

```ts

> // TODO(wagnermaciel): Do we have a common format for all TODOs the script adds?

Reviewer: For styles, its "TODO: The following rule targets internal classes of COMPONENT_NAME that may no longer apply for the MDC version". (https://github.com/angular/components/blob/main/src/material/schematics/ng-generate/mdc-migration/rules/style-migrator.ts#L183)

Reviewer 2: Styles are the only places we add these todos

Author: We should change it to generate a more searchable TODO, e.g. `TODO(MDC):`. I'm surprised there's no TODO for templates that use chips-list, are we able to figure out what new version of chips to change them to?

Reviewer 2: Yep! It was tricky but we got it working

> // TODO(wagnermaciel): Do we have a common format for all TODOs the script adds?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, the only todos we add are for css files.

`The following rule targets internal classes of <COMPONENT> that may no longer apply for the MDC version.`

[Material Design Components for Web (MDC)](https://github.com/material-components/material-components-web).
The components in the following packages have been rewritten:
* @angular/material/autocomplete
* @angular/material/button
* @angular/material/card
* @angular/material/checkbox
* @angular/material/chips
* @angular/material/core
* @angular/material/dialog
* @angular/material/form-field
* @angular/material/input
* @angular/material/list
* @angular/material/menu
* @angular/material/paginator
* @angular/material/progress-bar
* @angular/material/progress-spinner
* @angular/material/radio
* @angular/material/select
* @angular/material/slide-toggle
* @angular/material/slider
* @angular/material/snack-bar
* @angular/material/table
* @angular/material/tabs
* @angular/material/tooltip

The rewritten components offer several benefits over the old implementations, including:
* Improved accessibility
* Better adherence to the Material Design spec
* Faster adoption of future versions of the Material Design spec, due to being based on common 
  infrastructure

## What has changed?

The new components have different internal DOM and CSS styles. However, the TypeScript APIs and

> component/directive selectors for the new components have been kept as close as possible to the old

Reviewer 3: I might say "most of" since some did change more significantly

implementation. This makes it straightforward to migrate your app and get it running with the new
components.

Due to the new DOM and CSS, you will likely find that some styles in your app need to be adjusted,
particularly if your CSS is overriding styles on internal elements on any of the migrated
components.

There are a few components with larger changes to their APIs that were necessary in order to
integrate with MDC. These components include:
* form-field
* chips
* slider
* list

> See below for a [detailed list of changes](#Detailed List of Changes) to be aware of for these and

Reviewer 3: I think the anchor links are dash-cased by GitHub and our docs tooling

> See below for a [detailed list of changes](#Detailed List of Changes) to be aware of for these and
> other components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See below for a [comprehensive list of changes](#Detailed List of Changes) for all components.
```

> The old implementation of each new component is now deprecated, but still available under a "legacy"
> package. e.g. The old `mat-button` implementation can be used by importing the legacy button module.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The old implementation of each new component is now deprecated, but still available from a "legacy"
import. For example, you can import the old `mat-button` implementation by importing the legacy button module.
```
nit: I'd use "import" instead of "package" since most people will associate "package" == "npm package"
nit: passive voice
nit: try to avoid "e.g." and "i.e." in technical docs (though I've been very guilty of this myself in the past)

```ts
import {MatLegacyButtonModule} from '@angular/material/legacy-button';
```

## How to Migrate

> Migrating an existing app to use MDC based components is a tool-assisted migration. The Angular
> Material team has built [schematics](https://angular.io/guide/schematics) to handle as much of the
> work as possible. However, some manual effort will be needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can start your migration by running Angular Material's automated refactoring
tool. This tool, implemented as an [Angular Schematic](https://angular.io/guide/schematics),
updates the majority your code to the new component versions. While some follow-up is
necessary, you can reduce the manual effort by following the following best practices:
```

(this was a hard one) rough suggestion: some passive voice, some tense (trying to always keep present tense)

Author: sgtm, just changed the part that says "following the following" because that sounded silly

You can reduce the amount of manual effort needed by ensuring that your app follows good practices
before migrating.
* Avoid overriding styles on internal Angular Material elements in your CSS as much as possible. If
  you find yourself frequently overriding styles on internal elements, consider using a component
  that is designed for more style customization, such as the ones available in the
  [Angular CDK](/cdk).
* Use [component harnesses](/guide/using-component-harnesses) to interact with Angular Material
  components in tests rather than probing internal elements, properties, or methods of the
  component. Using component harnesses makes your tests easier to understand and more robust to
  changes in Angular Material

### 1. Update to Angular Material v15

Angular Material now includes a schematic to help migrate pre-existing apps to use the new
MDC-based components. To get started, upgrade your app to Angular Material 15.

```shell

> ng update @angular/components^15

Author: According to the [docs](https://angular.io/cli/update), its `ng update @angular/core` to update to the latest and `ng update @angular/core@^<major_version>` to update to a specific major

```

This command will update your app's TypeScript, CSS, and templates to the new implementations,
updating as much as it can automatically.

#### Running a Partial Migration

Depending on the size and complexity of your app, you may want to migrate a single component (or
small group of components) at a time, rather than all at once. 
TODO(wagnermaciel): Add details on this: script params, which components need to move together

You may also want to migrate your app one module at a time instead of all together. It is possible
to use both the old implementation and new implementation in the same app, as long as they aren't
used in the same module. TODO(wagnermaciel): Add detail on this: script params.

### 3. Check for TODOs left by the migration script.

In situations where the script is not able to automatically update your code, it will attempt to add
comments for a human to follow up. These TODO comments follow a common format, so they can be easily
identified.

```ts
// TODO(wagnermaciel): Do we have a common format for all TODOs the script adds?
```

To search for all comments left by the script, search for `TODO(...):` in your IDE, or use the

> following grep command.

Author: I assume not that hard (cc @amysorto who is working on the `ng generate` script)

> following grep command.

Author: Added a TODO as a reminder about this

```shell

> grep -lr --exclude-dir=node_modules "TODO(...):"

Author: 👍 if we wind up generating the csv I'll mention that instead

* After toggling a checkbox with the mouse, the ripple will remain visible instead of animating out.

### Chips

* The chips component has been split into multiple variants corresponding with more appropriate
  interaction patterns for accessibility. The original `mat-chip-list` used `role="listbox"`, but
  this interaction pattern is not suited for all use-cases. The new chips have:

  * `<mat-chip-listbox>` with `<mat-chip-option>` - this is the closest to the previous interaction
    pattern. This is the only variant that supports selection state for chips. This pattern aligns
    with the filter chips pattern specified in the material design spec. This pattern should be used
    when you want the user to select one or more values from a list of options.
  
  * `<mat-chip-grid>` with `<mat-chip-row>` - this pattern should be used for any text input + chips
    interaction.
  
  * `<mat-chip-set>` with `<mat-chip>` - this variant has no accessibility pattern and assumes one
    will be applied at the application level. This allows the application to implement a custom
    accessibility pattern with the chips visuals.

> * The `mdc_migration` tool always changes the legacy `<mat-chip-list>` to `<mat-chip-listbox>` to

Author: no, I think this was a c/p artifact from the internal docs

  center aligned in the form-field. Use `matTextPrefix` or `matTextSuffix` to indicate a text
  prefix/suffix, and `matIconPrefix` or `matIconSuffix` to indicate an icon prefix/suffix. The old
  `matSuffix` and `matPrefix` APIs will behave like icons, though they are now deprecated.

* The MDC-based form-field has a new `@Input() subscriptSizing: 'fixed'|'dynamic'`. When this
  setting is set to `fixed` (default), the form-field reserves enough space in the layout to show
  one line of hint or error text. When set to `dynamic`, the form-field expands and contracts the 
  amount of space it takes in the layout to fit the error / hint that is currently shown.

### Input

* MatInput must be inside `<mat-form-field>`. Previously it was (unintentionally) possible to use an
  `<input matInput>` without the form field if the page loaded form field styles elsewhere.

* The MDC-based MatInput hides the native calendar picker indicator associated with
  `<input matInput type="date">`, if you want this indicator to appear for your inputs, use the
  following CSS:

    ```scss
    .mat-mdc-input-element::-webkit-calendar-picker-indicator {
      display: block;
    }

>     ```

Author: Yes, the individual component docs are being updated in separate PRs and people *should* be referring to these bullet points to see if anything needs to be added. @crisbeto did input - do you know if this made it into the public docs?

### List

* The API has been reworked to support text wrapping and better integration with the Material Design
  specification.

* Previously, list items were commonly created using multiple `span` elements with the `matLine`
  directive applied. Each `span` resulting in a line, and the first one becoming the primary line.

>   With the new API, the `matLine` directive has been split into two more granular and obvious

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  With the new API, the `matLine` directive has been split into two more granular and meaningful
```

  directives:
  * `matListItemTitle`
  * `matListItemLine`

* Every list item is supposed to have a title for accessibility. If no explicit title and lines are
  provided, the direct content of the `<mat-list-item>` will become the title. You cannot have
  multiple line directives without a title.

  ```html
  <mat-list-item>This is the title</mat-list-item>

>   ```

Reviewer 3: I'm confused by this one. We don't apply any a11y pattern for `<mat-list>` + `<mat-list-item>`, so I'm not sure what this is talking about. Even it was a plain `role="list"`, the entire contents of the list item would be its label in the a11y tree

Author: This is c/p from internal docs, it looks like @devversion is the original author - can you clarify?

Reviewer 4: We can just remove the accessibility portion. I don't fully recall where this came from and I think Jeremy is right. A title is still required- but mostly for the visual requirements/specification of the Material Design component.

  `<mat-list-item>` to activate wrapping.

  ```html
  <mat-list-item lines="3">
    <span matListItemTitle>Title</span>
    This will text will wrap into the third line. Space for three lines is acquired by the list
    item.
  </mat-list-item>
  ```

  Note that text inside a `matListItemTitle` or `matListItemLine` will never wrap. Only unscoped
  content will wrap/take up the remaining space based on explicit number of lines provided.

* Aside from the differences in how lines are composed, some other directives have been renamed to
  use more explicit naming:
  * `matListIcon` is now `matListItemIcon`
  * `matListAvatar` is now `matListItemAvatar`

* Lastly, also a new directive (`matListItemMeta`) is available to put content into the meta section
  of a list item (usually the end of the list item). Previously unscoped content in a list item was 
  put into the meta section.

* Recommended migration steps for common use of a list item:
  1. Change the first `matLine` to `matListItemTitle`
  2. Change all other `matLine`'s to `matListItemLine`
  3. Change all `matListIcon` to `matListItemIcon`
  4. Change all `matListAvatar` to `matListItemAvatar`

>   5. Wrap all unscoped content (content outside a `matLine`) in a `matListItemMeta` container.

Reviewer 3: cc @wagnermaciel how much of this do we do automatically?

Reviewer 4: FYI: In the internal migration tool- I implemented an initial AST-based automation of this. It's hard to get this fully right but it leaves TODOs in place and tries to help at least a bit.

Author: We probably want to port that logic to the external tool if we haven't already @amysorto

### Menu

* The icon for a menu item appears before the text, regardless of the order in the DOM.

  * If you have a piece of content such as an `<img>` that you want to use in place of a

>     `<mat-icon>` use `ngProjectAs="mat-icon"` to project it into the icon slot.

Reviewer 3: Could we add an additional projected attribute for this instead? ``ngProjectAs="mat-icon"`` is icky

  
  * If you need your icon to appear at the end of the item (not officially supported by the spec)
    you can wrap both the text and your icon in a span, e.g.

    ```html
    <span>
      <span>Text</span>
      <mat-icon>end_icon</mat-icon>
    </span>
    ```
    
* The text in menu items wrap instead of being hidden with an ellipses.

### Option / Optgroup

* Long options now wrap instead of truncating with an ellipsis.

### Paginator

* The form-field inside of `mat-paginator` only supports the `appearance` options offered by the new
  form-field (`fill` and `outline`).

### Progress Bar

* Hiding the bar with `visibility: hidden` will not hide all internal elements because they apply
  a `visibility: visible` style. Instead, style it with `opacity: 0` or `display: none`, or remove
  it completely with `ngIf`.

* Height is always set to 4px and does not get shorter or taller using `height` styles.

### Progress Spinner

> * Host element is no longer `display: block` which may affect layout. To fix layout issues, simply
>   add `display: block` back to the element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Host element is no longer `display: block` which may affect layout. To fix layout issues,
  add `display: block` back to the element.
```

  is the same width as the form-field

### Slide Toggle

* Accessibility: MDC-based version uses `<button role="switch">` to represent the toggle rather than
  `<input type="checkbox">`

* Accessibility: The touch target is much larger than the slide toggle; to match the legacy size,
  you can provide a `-5` density to the slide toggle’s theme mixin:

  ```scss
  @use '@angular/material' as mat;

  @include mat.slide-toggle-theme(
    map-merge($theme, (density: -5))
  );
  ```

  Without the density mixin, the touch targets collide (see blue outlined targets below) collide:

  TODO(mmalerba): replace this with a working image or embedded example:
  ![alt_text](../images/slide-toggle-diff.png "Diagram showing overlapping slide-toggle touch targets")

* The label is closer to the enabled toggle

### Slider

* Accessibility: sliders now work with mobile device screen readers.

* To accommodate range sliders, the implementation has changed from the `<mat-slider>` element being
  the form control to the `<mat-slider>` element containing 1-2 `<input>` elements (the slider
  "thumbs") that act as the form control(s). The value, associated events (`input`, `change`), and

>   labels (`aria-label`) now live on the `<input>` elements instead.

Reviewer 3: cc @wagnermaciel how much of this is captured by the migration tool?

> * Vertical sliders and inverted sliders are no longer supported, as they are not part of the
>   Material Design spec.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Vertical sliders and inverted sliders are no longer supported, as they are no longer part of the
  Material Design spec.
```
I don't know if this is worth mentioning, but I strongly suspect we'll be adding vertical sliders back

Author: If we're pretty confident about re-adding vertical sliders we could split the bullet to mention that inverted ones are gone and vertical ones are not yet implemented, but planned for a future release

Author: Added a TODO

* Range sliders are now supported. TODO(mmalerba): add more about this.

### Snack Bar

* For simple, text-based snack-bars, there are no significant changes.

> * For simple snack-bars with an action button, they use the MDC-based mat-button, so your app will
>   need to include the theme sass for the MDC-based button

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For simple snack-bars with an action button, they use the MDC-based mat-button, so your app will
  need to include the Sass theming mixin for the MDC-based button
```

* For snack-bars that use custom structured content (i.e. calls to `MatSnackBar.openFromComponent`

>   and `MatSnackBar.openFromTemplate`), you  should use the following new directives to annotate your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  and `MatSnackBar.openFromTemplate`), you should use the following new directives to annotate your
```

  content:
  * `matSnackBarLabel` to mark the text displayed to users
  * `matSnackBarActions` to mark the element containing the action buttons
  * `matSnackBarAction` to mark individual action buttons
  * If you do not specify any of these directives, it will treat the entire custom component /
    template as text.

* Tests that open a snack-bar now require calling `flush()` before attempting to access the content

>   of the snackbar.

Reviewer 3: ...but use harnesses and you don't have to care?

### Table

* Every cell has `16px` left and right padding. Previously only a `24px` padding applied to the
  leftmost and rightmost cells.

* Header text size and color matches the data rows.

> * Text will not wrap by default; to enable text wrapping, apply the `white-space: normal` style to
>   the `<mat-cell>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Text will not wrap by default; to enable text wrapping, apply the `white-space: normal` style to
  the table cell.
```
or is it only `<mat-cell>` and not `<td mat-cell>` ?

Author: both I believe

* Row height is `52px` instead of `48px`.

> * Cells have box-sizing `border-box` instead of `content-box`. This may affect  custom width styles.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Cells have box-sizing `border-box` instead of `content-box`. This may affect custom width styles.
```

* The paginator property of the `MatTableDataSource` has a generic interface that matches most of
  the paginator API. You may need to explicitly type the paginator to access the full API, e.g.
  `new MatTableDataSource<MyData, MatPaginator>();`

> * MDC-based flex tables (`<mat-table>`) display borders on their cells instead  of the rows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* MDC-based flex tables (`<mat-table>`) display borders on their cells instead of the rows.
```

* The last row of the table no longer has a bottom border since the table is assumed to be
  surrounded by a border.

* Flex table row height is set using `height` instead of `min-height`.

### Tabs

* Accessibility: `MatTabNav` now throws an error if the `[tabPanel]` input is not provided. The

>   `[tabPanel]` input and associated `mat-tab-nav-panel` component improve accessibility.

Reviewer 3: This one is going to need some further elaboration (we changed the entire interaction pattern of nav tabs)

Author: Ok, I plan to have the people with the most context on each component go over this guide after and polish up their sections / make sure all relevant info is included. Adding a TODO in the mean time.
